---
layout: archive
title: "Blog"
permalink: /blog/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /blog
---

{% include base_path %}

Chances are that this blog will die at some point. It will be regularly updated initially, and less and less as time goes by. Alas, that's what usually happens. But it's a risk I'm willing to take. I will write here short notes, mostly, I guess, on scientific articles I've read.

Review article, article review (21/12/2023)
------
I've finished revising and re-submitted a general review on chemistry, mechanisms, and evolution of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs). This brought back the memories from 12 years ago or so, when I had just finished my undergraduate studies and did a 6-month internship at the Weizmann Institute in Israel, in the group of Joel Sussman. 

It was a great, formative time for me. I shadowed a PhD student and did some enzyme kinetics measurements and crystallisation with him, learned to write scripts in Perl, and - which is why I started thinking about it again - wrote <a href="https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/pro.657">a review article</a> - the very first scientific article of any type in my life. The topic was proteolytic stability of intrinsically disordered proteins in vitro and in cells. It started with Joel asking me for my opinion on a paper he had to review. Nobody had ever given me such a responsible task, so I approached it (too) ambitiously, read widely around, and wrote a long (too long) opinion on the article. Joel suggested we transform it from a review of a paper into a review article on the topic that the paper was about. I had then recently learned how to make simple schematics in a freeware equivalent of Illustrator called Inkscape, so I tried to make use of it for illustrating my little review. I don't know if what we wrote there still remains up to date after 12 years, but I have fond memories of writing it, discussing it with supervisors and getting their feedback, and then of seeing it published. Since then, I have participating in writing a few more review articles, but the one now is special - and closest to the one 12 years ago - in that I did it mostly by myself and put extra effort. Let's see what comes out of it. PTMs have been an interest of mine for many years, the main unifying theme that connects different projects I have been doing over the last 12 years or so, since my undergraduate studies and that internship with Joel. Studying different particular PTMs, first in bacteria (protein arginine phosphorylation) and then in eukaryotes (ADP-ribosylation, ubiquitylation, SUMOylation...), I started asking myself questions about the chemical nature of these processes, and how it is connected to, on the one hand, their catalysis, and, on the other hand, their emergence and development during evolution. In short, what I think is interesting is that most major PTMs are chemically analogous in that they all involve some kind of nucleophilic substitution reaction where a protein reacts with a donor molecule present in the cell (usually present there for other reasons, and present already before PTM reactions emerged - examples of such donors include ATP, NAD, SAM, acyl coenzymes A, UDP-sugars, etc., all of which are involved in metabolic processes in addition to protein modification). In these donor molecules, one can distinguish a good leaving group, which leaves during the reaction, the rest of the donor ending up covalently attaching to the protein. So enzymes that catalyse PTMs tend to perform similar tasks, binding the donor in such a way that it promotes the departure of the leaving group and the nucleophilic attack, and often they deprotonate an amino-acid residue on the protein to make it more nucleophilic and attack the donor more efficiently. In the review, I try describing these chemical and catalytic analogies, but also analogies between different PTM systems in terms of how the substrates are recognised by the writer enzymes, how the modification might be reversed by eraser enzymes, and how the product is recognised by reader proteins. And, lastly, I try to discuss the evolutionary emergence of these processes, where one part of the story is that the suitable "activated" donor molecules had existed in primordial prokaryotes to serve in primary metabolism and then became repurposed as co-substrates of enzymatic protein modifications. That's a very brief summary of the review, which will perhaps be out in a few months. There will be some figures, too. Now I have a license for the real Adobe Illustrator, but I still make the same sort of simple schematics to illustrate the processes I write about.

So that's one thing I've been doing in the last few days. I also had to do some things in the wet lab (mutagenesis and some recombinant protein production, autoclaving media, etc.), and today I wrote a review of an article. Since very recently, I am (very sporadically) asked to do it directly by journals, which is flattering but also some responsibility. With the review article and the article review now submitted and this blog post finished, tomorrow I start two weeks of holidays for Christmas.

Paper on PARP4 (01/12/2023)
------
I've finally read <a href="https://academic.oup.com/nar/advance-article/doi/10.1093/nar/gkad1064/7424435">this study of PARP4 by Léonie Frigon and John Pascal</a> and strongly recommend it to those interested in PARPs and ADP-ribosylation (one of my interests, especially during my 'previous life' as a postdoc). PARP4 is an odd cousin of the canonical PARP protein, PARP1, sharing a larger homology region with it than any other of 17 or so PARP family members in humans. At the same time, PARP4 is quite diverged from PARP1 in terms of cellular location and function. Previous work, largely from the Pascal lab, showed that PARP1 is an amazing allosteric machine that is very tightly regulated. Now PARP4 can be seen as an example of evolution duplicating and rewiring this molecular machine, keeping some functions and chaning or modulating others.

I enjoyed the thoughtfully crafted and cautious text that leaves room for discussion and interpretation of results, going through various important aspects of PARP4 and how it seems to differ from PARP1, including the regulation by HD, the absence of the PAR chain extension function in PARP4, the potential roles of WGR and BRCT domains. For example, it looks like the HD of PARP4 does not inhibit its catalytic activity much (unlike in PARP1), and the WGR apparently lost its nucleic acid-binding function, while BRCT retains it, possibly prefering vault RNA over other nucleic acids, although that is not completely clear.

Earlier this year we published a paper that analyses AlphaFold2 models of all PARP family members, including PARP4. I'm sorry if it has in some ways impinged on the apparent novelty of this article by Frigon and Pascal or caused any stress with their publication. I don't think it did impinge on the novelty. Indeed, we only now get a real experimental analysis of the N-terminal catalytic region of PARP4, combining crystallography with functional in-vitro assays.

Working at the bench (27/11/2023)
------
I do hope I will be able to continue working with my own hands at the bench still for some time, rather than focussing only on administrative and supervision roles. I do enjoy the wet lab a lot and also think working with your own hands is useful for thinking about projects. There are many great group leaders who do not work at the bench any more themselves, but I would like to do it if I can. I've been in a meeting with a Nobel prizewinner for ubiquitin discovery, Avram Hershko, once, and he said that even now, after the big prize etc., and in his wisdom years, he works at the bench, usually from the early morning until around midday, where he begins to take care of other things. That sounded great. On this topic, a quotation I've found, about the pioneer of fly genetics, Thomas Hunt Morgan: "Throughout their careers Morgan and students worked at the bench. The investigator must be on top of the research if he or she is to recognize unexpected findings when they occur."

At home and away (27/11/2023)
------
I do enjoy travelling, although much less since I have a family, unless, of course, we can go together. The last two months or so have been a period of several work-related trips, mostly short and nearby (all by train), but still amounting to quite some time away from home and the lab, and only one of the trips was together with my family.

One, alone, was to a local conference organised mainly by and for scientists from Tours and Orléans, the yearly Colloque Biotechnocentre. It was its 35th edition already. The conference is held in French and takes place on two consecutive days, with an evening (with a party) in between. There are poster sessions for PhD students and talks by invited guests from outside the region and local scientists, both more senior and PhDs. I had a short talk entitled 'Why we study protein SUMOylation?', or rather 'Pourquoi étudier la SUMOylation des protéines ?', because it was the first proper scientific talk that I've given in French, with much fear and trembling. But it was a nice experience in the end, having managed to do it and seeing that I have been mostly understandable. I enjoyed this particular yearly conference very much. I like its broad scope in terms of topics but at the same time the regional focus, and I like the multi-generational make-up, with both older (some retired for some time) and young scientists, and last but not least the fact that it combines an intensive scientific programme with a party and long French-style meals etc. At the same time, it is relatively modest in terms of venue etc. and not too expensive. I was very impressed by PhD students - their talks and posters were very well prepared and well presented and the atmosphere was friendly. By the way, I had a very similar impression at a PhD defence I attended in Rennes as a member of a jury in early November - of being impressed by the PhD students, both the one defending (she did it great), but also those attending the small party afterwards, being there for her.

Another recent occassion was a meeting of prize-winners of the French ATIP-Avenir programme. A great meeting as well, and what I particularly liked this time was that they invited some older scientists (some of them themselves ATIP-Avenir laureates from the past) to give talks that were not pure scientific talks but rather attempts to share experience of running a group and developing your research after the first grant. Two of the speakers whose names stayed in my head were François Parcy and Jean-Louis Mandel, but there were many others. There were also short talks by the ATIP-Avenir awardees themselves, including myself, presenting the selected projects. I should say that because of the rules of the ATIP/Avenir programme, getting an ERC grant means you don't get any money from ATIP - but you still get a 'label' of an ATIP-Avenir programme and get to attend the events like this, which is nice (there were several people in this situation).

Finally, the last two trips - 5 days in Marseille on the biannual French structural biology meeting called BSI, and then a seminar in Basel, at the FMI institute, last Friday. But let me write more about the BSI conference. It was the second BSI meeting I have attended in my life, after the one two years ago in Saclay, which was one of the first things I did after starting the job in France. The BSI meetings are really good. Quite diverse in terms of biological questions and techniques (ranging from EM and crystallography to more niche biophysical techniques such as AFM or EPR), with a diverse set of speakers at different career stages (most of them from France, but there are always some invited speakers from other countries). It is a good opportunity to get a sense of how the field is developing, at least in France (e.g. this year - the growing interest in EM tomography and, obviously, in AlphaFold). I had a talk in which I presented, for the first time, a new topic in the lab. The talk went ok, I think, but I didn't have it finished before the conference so the evenings before my talk were stressful and busy with rehearsals. There was a lovely 'gala dinner' during the conference in a museum, on the last floor, overlooking the harbour of Marseille.

It was at the BSI in Marseille that I had a conversation with one young scientist about science as a social phenomenon. This social dimension of science - the invisible hierarchies and codes that govern it - has always fascinated me. Conferences or visits at other labs are great opportunities not only to learn about new discoveries or establish collaborations - although they are both - but also to look at science for a moment with an outsider's eye, which allows noticing various peculiarities of how sience works.

But there is also a price to travelling, especially being separated from one's family and putting an unequal burden on the spouse/partner. I hope I will travel less in the future.


Nobels 2023 (06/10/2023)
------
Like every year, I'd been eagerly awaiting the announcement of Nobel prizes. Like everybody else, I was very happy to hear that Katalin Karikó and Drew Weissman were awarded, especially Karikó, but what I think made me even happier was the Nobel prize in literature awarded to Jon Fosse, a Norwegian writer whose thick *Sepatalogy* I began reading some time ago and which has enchanted me in a special way. A running joke is that Fosse's new novel is easy to read, because you just need to read one sentence (there are no full stops in the whole long book). Well, easy it is not, but it is a particularly convincing example of a stream-of-consciousness narrative, and the writing has a singular trance-inducing rythm.

Grenoble revisited (04/10/2023)
------
We're going to Grenoble today, just me and a colleague, for a couple of days, to do some SAXS experiments at the synchrotron. I think it's been about 12 years since I first visited the ESRF synchrotron. It was before my PhD, during an internship I did in the group of Joel L. Sussman at the Weizmann Institute in Israel. We spent a few days in Grenoble, collecting data for two days or so and also doing a little bit of sight-seeing (we took a cable car to a base beneath Mont Blanc and stopped in Chambéry). I remember the Hebrew word "maruah" that we used when poorly diffracting crystals gave a smeary pattern. In addition to it being the first time at a synchrotron, it was one of the first encounters with France. Eating croissants in the ESRF guesthouse for breakfast, little did I know that I would one day live and work in France. I've been to Grenoble a few times since, but not in the last 5.5 years or so, so I'm happy to go back. And it's the first time I'll do SAXS there.

Added on 6th October: So now we're actually in Grenoble, and almost finished and leaving very soon. It's been a lovely couple of days. We've met some kind people at the beamline and outside of it, including some old friends and a postdoc behind the data of one of my favourite talks in the Aviesan meeting mentioned below. The scenery of the Polygone Scientifique of Grenoble, with mountains all around, and the atmosphere - all the scientists, including many young people, working here or just coming to collect data - it's all very special.

Aviesan 'Membrane-less organelles and liquid condensates' symposium, Paris 25th September 2023 (26/09/2023)
------
I very much enjoyed yesterday's one-day symposium on membrane-less organelles organised by Aviesan, one of those enigmatic French organisations that I haven't figured out yet. What I've figured out so far is that it is an alliance of scientists that is reputed for organising very nice free symposia on different topics, and this was one of these. The main organisers of this specific symposium were Carine Giovannangeli, Yves Gaudin, and Dominique Weil. The symposium was held in Jacques Monod Institut in Paris (my first time there), so very conveniently near the Austerlitz Station where trains from Orléans arrive. I don't know the field of biomolecular condensates very well and have been at times sceptical of some very general claims that I heard, but the symposium made me realise that there is a lot of nuance in the field, like, for example, an attempt to distinguish polymer polymer phase separation or mere binding-driven phenomena from (perhaps rarer?) liquid-liquid phase separation, or the realisation that 'membrane-less organeless' often result at least in part from defined and specific (even if weak) binding events, or the idea that there is sometimes some degree of order within these apparently liquid structures. So there is nuance and more theoretical and technical innovation, but there is also certain dynamism and audacity characteristic of new fields and new paradigms, and I enjoyed that aspect a lot. I think my favourite talks were those by Chloe Zubieta, Ariel Lindner, Fabian Erdel, Martin Blackledge, but I liked all of the others too, including by young scientists, which did a very good job (a postdoc Damien Glon, for example, and Anastasiia Skolbelikna). Overall, a great line-up of talks spanning a bit the whole field in France, with both some finished studies and some work in progress. The main keynote lecture by Anthony Hyman - the only speaker outside of France - was on Zoom but the technology worked well. I'm looking forward to more events like this.

Protein homodimerisation (20/09/2023)
------
A lot of proteins we see in nature are homodimers in which the dimerisation interface is formed by two identical surfaces, one on each subunit, coming together. This is how many proteins have evolved to be, and various functional advantages of homodimerisation (things like cooperativity, or higher stability, or easier folding, etc.) might have driven this evolution. But, generally speaking, for a feature to be selected for and optimised over time, it has to already exist in a primordial system, and perhaps if there is a bias towards that feature already at the start, it can be more easily picked up and optimised over time. Is there, therefore, an inherent bias for a random protein surface to associate with itself rather than with a different protein surface? This is a question posed in <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2006.11.020">this somewhat old paper</a> from Lukatsky et al. (the Shakhnovich lab). The paper contains a simplified model of a protein surface through which this question is investigated computationally (giving an affirmative answer), but there is also a common-sense argument, which I like, and which I think can be rephrased in the following way. What is special about a typical homodimerisation interface? That it has what crystallographers call  2-fold rotational symmetry (C2 symmetry), which means that all (or most) interactions are repeated twice. If residue X from subunit 1 interacts with residue Y from subunit 2, then residue Y from subunit 1 interacts with residue X from subunit 2. This repetition has implications for the likelihood of making homodimers, because, if you make certain favourable interactions by chance, they will be repeated twice. I think this is similar to what Lukatsky et al. say here: "it is more probable to symmetrically match a half of a random pattern with itself than with a different random pattern, which requires a full match". If we imagine that dimerisation is pattern-matching, it is more probable to match half of a pattern (& symmetry does the other half) than to match a full pattern (which is what has to happen during hetero-dimerisation)

I think that the repeptition idea also implies that the rate with which an interface becomes optimised over time is higher for a homodimer than a heterodimer - because a favourable mutation that strengthens the interface would have an amplified effect (would effectively be a double mutation). As Monod and his colleagues working on haemoglobin already observed, symmetry amplifies effects. Perhaps this is the common-sense rationale behind <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2009.10.044">another modelling study</a>, this time from G. E. Schulz and with a more sophisticated model tracking evolution over time. This second study concluded that a simulated evolutionary process that leads to homodimerisation has the probability that is by a factor of 100 or above higher than the probability of an analogous simulated process that leads to heterodimerisation.

